Okay, this is Ron Shorn interviewing Heiss
Spinrad at Heiss Home in Moraga, California on
June 9th, 1993. Heida, just for the record, what's
your full name? Heiren Spinrad. How do you spell
that? H-Y-R-O-N-S-P-I-N-R-A-D.
When were you born? Long ago. What date? February
17th, 1934. And where were you born? New York. What
part of New York? Bad part. Brooklyn? Actually, I
think I was born in New York City, but I lived in
Brooklyn after the first week. How did you get
interested in astronomy? My grandmother was
interested in a lot of intellectual things,
family not having an extraordinarily
intellectual background. I'm not sure where that
started. But in any case, she brought several
books home when I was, gosh, I don't know, between
five and seven years of age. and I was interested in
looking at the sky. When I was eight years old,
during World War II, New York became blacked out,
and therefore the sky got dark. So you could
actually see the stars in the Milky Way, and
everything that was supposed to be there was
there. That was fairly inspiring to a young kid. So
I think it was my grandmother's influence and the
fact that you could see the sky and wonder about it
that got me started, and then I got small telescope
of relatively low quality that was adequate to see
a few double stars and perhaps maybe barely the
phases of Venus, and that helped a lot too. That was
from some kind of pawn shop, I think. Did this
interest in astronomy carry through high school?
No, not vividly. In high school, I sort of got away
from that and was more interested in in sports, and
I still did okay in physics and chemistry and
mathematics, but I didn't really have my heart in
it. On the other hand, I didn't know what else to do
when I went to start my undergraduate education at
Berkeley, so I decided I would be an astronomer
unless something better came along. How come
Berkeley if you were born in New York City? Yes,
good point. My family and I moved to California in
1946 when I was 12 years old, in junior high school.
So I did my junior high school and high school
curriculum in San Francisco. Berkeley was
nearby, in those days very inexpensive, and I
could live there and not break the bank, which was
relatively thin. So were you an astronomy major?
Yeah, I was an astronomy major initially by
default. Then after I took a class With Struve, I
knew I really liked it. I don't know if he had a
reputation of being a good teacher, but he was
inspirational, whether he knew it or not. When did
you get your bachelor's degree? Bachelor's
degree was in 55. And then you went to grad school?
No, I was in the Army for two years in between, in the
Philippines, Marianas, Carolinas, and western
U.S., measuring stellar occultations under John
O'Keefe's project, which was to find the location
of everything between the West Coast and China for
unpeaceful reasons. Middle of the Cold War, of
course.
What was your thesis on? My thesis was the stellar
content of nearby bright galaxies. I did that with
Whitford and Mayall, predominantly. Did you pick
that, or did they pick it for you? I picked it,
actually, which was perhaps slightly unusual,
and that made it a little bit hard to find the
appropriate advisor, but it turned out that those
two men Male and Woodford actually were perfect
for this, and I learned a lot from them. Why did you
pick that topic? Why were you interested in it?
I've always been interested in stellar spectra,
and the stellar content of galaxies, I thought,
could be attacked in that way. And Morgan and Male
had just come out with a paper doing a little bit of
that in a very qualitative way. So it was somewhat
of an outgrowth of the interest in stars and the
timeliness of it and the availability of...
relatively modest, or now we would say very
modest, equipment on medium-sized telescopes.
Which was like the Crosley, 36 inches. 0.9 meter,
yeah, 36 inch. I used both 36 inches at Lick,
actually, the Crosley more than the refractor.
When did you get your PhD? PhD was in 61. Okay, and
where did you go from there? Right to JPL. How come?
Well, that was strange. Yeah, yeah, I know. Sagan
had come to Berkeley in 60, I guess, as a Miller...
fellow after his PhD from Chicago. And he was the
first person around Berkeley to talk about
planets in what then seemed a modern way,
exploring them by spacecraft, exploring them in
other ways, and doing more than just a few poorish
review articles of the previous generation would
suggest. Certainly Berkeley at the time was not a
hotbed of planetary astronomy. There was some
celestial mechanics, of course, going on. How did
you pick JPL, or did they come around? I
interviewed a bunch of places. I wanted to stay in
California if possible for family reasons
predominantly, and I checked out A couple places.
There were industrial places that were looking
for astronomers then, too, although those jobs
later turned out to be kind of ephemeral. What,
like North American aviation? Aeroneutronics
from Ford.
Lockheed, I think, were in general not so much the
time I was actually looking around. A couple other
places whose names I've gracefully forgotten.
Were those places funded by the Air Force or by NASA
or what? I'm not really sure. I never dug into it
that deeply. Probably anything they could come up
with. So probably all those. Anyway, JPL was
another one on the list, and I went down there and
checked out Caltech. Greenstein had a postdoc
available, and JPL did them sort of both in the same
week. And... Of course, Greenstein would have
been interested in me working on stars with his
abundance program. And, of course, JPL would have
been, at that time, happy to get an astronomer. Who
got the Greenstein thing? I don't remember.
Probably Sargent. Or Bob O'Dell or something.
O'Dell did get something down there, but I think
that was at Carnegie, actually. It was about the
same time, within a few months. The O'Dells and...
Our family actually were in the same apartment
complex, and the two wives met by accident over a
clothesline. It's a funny story in itself. Okay,
you arrived at JPL. Were you their first PhD
astronomer? Yeah, I think so. Of course, Ray
Newbern had been there for some time before. Who
was your boss? Was Luke Kaplan the boss? Not yet.
No, there was another guy who really didn't have a
technical background, who was the de facto
section boss, but in practice... Ray was just
about that without the stature or pay. And when you
got there and looked around, what did you think of
the place? I mean, there weren't any big
telescopes or anything. No, there weren't any big
telescopes, which created a problem that we'll
talk about shortly. That was, of course, a very
severe problem. But initially, I wasn't panicked
about that. The main job I was assigned to do at
first supposedly half time, but I had no idea what
fraction of time would be, was to coordinate an
instrument designed by Dr. Charles Barth, who
then was at JPL, a UV spectrometer, I think, to get
ultraviolet spectra of planets from spacecraft.
I'm not positive if the first one was a Mariner
Venus. Probably was, but I'm not positive of that
any longer. In any case, so I was supposed to
coordinate Barth and his engineers and the rest of
the project, which seemed like a strange role for a
fresh PhD who didn't know ultraviolet from the
bomber limit and certainly had no previous
experience dealing with interesting and
creative and, to be brutally frank about it, quite
egotistical personalities. But you learn when
you do these things. And actually, that turned out
to be mildly interesting and took much less of my
time than I thought it would. So I did actually have
time to initiate research if I wanted to. And I did a
little bit of continued work on galaxies, but I
figured I wasn't being paid by JPL to do that. So I
figured I would look into the possibilities in
planetary astronomy in areas that I had a little
bit of previous knowledge, that is spectroscopy
of the planets, and was annoyed to find that there
wasn't any modern data. There certainly was no
prospect of more coming in, at least nothing that I
would have any involvement in. And therefore, I
turned to the old historical data, which
astronomers generally keep forever, especially
in the days where photography was the prime method
of recording information. It's actually easier
to document photographic plate files than it is to
get people's CCD images in 1993, but that's
getting far afield. So in any case, I sort of fell
upon the Mount Wilson plate files, and that turned
out to be an interesting intro to planetary
astronomy. These were mainly photographic
spectra taken by Dunham and associates in the late
30s, and through World War II at a relatively low
pace. At which telescope? Ah, sorry. Mostly at the
100-inch telescope. This is pre-200-inch, and
the 200-inch spectrograph wasn't particularly
better than the 100-inch anyway. So it was
100-inch Coudet spectra, by and large, although
there were other types of spectra. But those were
the ones that had the most recorded information
and seemed to be amenable to some kind of new
quantitative or semi-quantitative analysis.
And they were done when the seeing was too poor to do
stellar astronomy? I'm not sure if it was
completely that. I mean, Dunham actually was a
staff member, so it wasn't, I don't believe, I
don't know the politics back that far precisely,
but my guess is that he probably didn't have to beg
as hard as an outsider would. But they were
definitely not done during prime hours. Some of
them were done in the daytime. I think a lot of them
were done after the sun was down, or else there
would have been more scattered light on them. What
did you get out of them? Well, I got some things
which later turned out not to be quite correct, but
nevertheless, at the time, they seemed
interesting. I was trying to measure the physical
parameters of the atmosphere of Venus from a study
of the carbon dioxide bands in the near-infrared,
which at high dispersion can give you information
on the rotational temperature of the CO2 gas,
which ought to be in a high-density atmosphere
equal to the kinetic temperature of the
atmosphere, whatever optical depth is
appropriate. That's a little tricky in a cloudy
atmosphere, but neglecting that complication,
it sounded like a good idea to look at whether Venus
was hot or cold a little bit deeper in the
atmosphere than infrared or such measures could
at the time do easily. And secondarily, if you
measure the line widths carefully and if there are
no other broadening mechanisms, you can get some
idea of the pressure also at the mean optical
depth. Now the last part I think was done with some
naivete, as you'll look back on it 30 years. But of
course, when you started, it was better than
anything else in the field. Definitely. Yes. I
asked Bill Sinton about the Sinton band, so I've
got to ask High Spinrad about the effect Spinrad.
Oh, the Jovian line tilt. Yes. I still haven't
quite figured that one out. Let me give a little
preface on that. Why does one have to get your name
attached to all things both good and bad? In any
case, the ammonia and methane lines in the
spectrum of Jupiter when the spectrograph slit is
placed along the equator to get the rotational
velocity turn out to be tilted approximately half
as much as the reflected lines from the solar
spectrum. The factor of two comes in basically
just a moving mirror and our aspect on Earth in the
simplest of geometries when the Sun, Earth, and
the outer planet, like Jupiter, are lined up, give
you just precisely a factor of two, because one of
the components is Sun, Jupiter, and the other,
Jupiter, Earth. And in the case of the methane and
ammonia bands, which are physically from the
Jovian atmosphere, you only get one of those. So
that tilt should be a factor of two less. And on some
spectra that Munch had obtained, and perhaps...
This is Guido Munch. Guido Munch, yes, professor
of astronomy at Caltech at the time. It looked like
the tilts were rather less than that, as if the
ammonia wasn't co-rotating with the atmospheric
velocity. Trouble is, the tilt was so different
from a half that the velocity difference you
predict turns out to probably be supersonic,
which was a bit weird, but as an empiricist, I was
quite willing to accept the observations. I'm not
quite sure what's happened, but every time
anybody else, including me, in future years tried
to reproduce the observations, which again were
fairly old at the time, the strange deviation from
half the expected tilt did not reproduce. So I've
always assumed that there was some peculiarity in
the way I measured the plates, but it doesn't
really make complete sense. So I'm not 100% sure
now what went wrong, but I'm pretty sure something
did. I don't believe it's a physical effect. It
drew a lot of attention, again, to planetary
astronomy, but not necessarily for the best of
reasons. Did you try and get Telescope Time to do
New Spectrum? Yeah, sure. And that was a long and
cluttered story, which basically was mostly
unsuccessful. Well, it was obvious that one could
do better by doing things yourself when you knew
what the problem was going to be, or in many cases,
with improved instrumentation. I mean, this is
still the era of photography, but, for example, in
near-infrared spectroscopy, fore-end plates
had replaced one-ends, and those have much higher
acuity. And generally, just the idea of doing
something yourself when you know what was
happening at the telescope is better than going
down to some archaic file and not knowing all
circumstances except what's written on the
envelope of the plate. So at first, I made casual
approaches to various observers and observatory
directors at Mount Wilson, at McDonald, back at
Lick, old stomping grounds. And these were not
greeted generally with much enthusiasm for
perhaps several reasons. I'm not positive which
ones were the most important. Planetary
astronomy still was not considered part of
mainstream astronomy. And I think this was
probably the largest factor in the sense that
directors and other people that ran
observatories were worried perhaps about
wasting valuable observing time. In other words,
real astronomers look down on planets. Yeah, for
better or for worse, that was the case at the very
beginning of the space age. I mean, obviously it
evolved, but initially that was true. Were you
ever told you made your choice between money and
telescope time? Not in writing. But orally? Yeah.
Yeah, okay. And we're slightly more diplomatic
than that. Yeah, I won't, in fact, mention the
person that said it the most bluntly, because it's
a guy you don't even know. Okay. But, yeah, I was
told that, and it was painful. JPL, of course, for
those uninitiated, paid a lot more than a
low-level academic job, starting salaries at JPL
were twice that of a postdoc and probably, I'm just
guessing, 40% or 50% higher than an assistant
professor would have been at the same time. So for a
fresh Ph.D., it was a lot of money. Now,
technically, JPL was a part of Caltech. Yes. But
practically, it was not. Is that correct? Yes.
There was a vast chasm that separated the
stature, so to speak, of JPL scientists with
Caltech science. In some cases, that was at least
true in some areas. That wasn't true in every
endeavor. I think the people that did radio and
radar astronomy were considered colleagues of
equal footing, perhaps. But in any case, Yes,
Caltech was not a cooperative partner in any sense
of the word, with one major exception, and that was
the influence of Guido Munch, professor of
astronomy at Caltech. Guido, for his own personal
interests, was interested in a variety of topics,
very, very broad person, and one of those was
planetary astronomy. So, on his own, he was doing a
fair amount of observing of planets, but even more
importantly, from my own personal viewpoint, he
was around as a pseudo-mentor. I mean, he's the
last person on Earth that would probably like to be
accused of being a good teacher. But in any case,
like it or not, he was in his own strange way. You
were reduced to looking for water vapor on planets
at Victoria, British Columbia, were you not?
Excellent choice, wouldn't you think? All right,
so that's a long story. Any case, let me make it
quite abbreviated. Water on Mars is a long, long
story, which, in fact, you have documented well.
My own interest in that came, again, just from
reading the review papers by Richardson, Dunham,
and other folks. And then the first attempts to try
to observe water from balloon altitudes by, I
think, Dollfuss, actually, was the first,
perhaps, to be successful. And people had thought
about this before. And there have been attempts at
Lowell Observatory also. The trick, of course, is
to have a dry site on Earth and or a Doppler shift to
move out the telluric lines from the Martian ones.
The Mars lines, obviously, were going to be very
weak since we know there's not very much water on
Mars if you spread out the polar caps, assuming
that they're half water or something like that.
You don't get a lot of water in the atmosphere at the
temperatures relevant to Mars. So I tried to get
time at Mount Wilson, and that would have required
using the 100-inch. The snow telescope, which I
did use for Venus, was inadequate even for Venus,
unfortunately. It was OK for getting a spectrum of
the sun, however. I learned a little bit by using
it. But that was as much as the observatory
committee and Director Bowen was willing to give
to me. I asked other places at Lick. I got a polite
reply from Director Albert Whitford, who
remarked that they had just gotten their big
telescope, the three-meter, what's called the
Shane, but now the Shane, a three-meter
telescope, had just gone on the air there, and they
had been second-rate citizens to the Mount Wilson
Palomar folks for so long that they weren't
anxious to give time away to, quotes Caltech,
quote, unquote, and Whitford remarked that I
should, you know, try here. And meaning at
Caltech. Yeah, yeah, right, which, you know, is a
logical thing to say. He wasn't trying to be
particularly mean about it. I was very defensive.
Well, nevertheless, nothing came of that. So I
tried also, I think, that early at McDonald's, but
I'm not positive it was really at that time. Was
this before Harlan took over? Oh, yes. When Kuiper
was still director. I think, actually, I had to do
it through the University of Chicago. Maybe I
didn't, but I did. In any case, it was definitely
before Harlan Smith. Well, let's continue on that
now. So I ended up then finding out, I don't
remember who told me, that they had a new 40-inch
telescope, 48-inch telescope at Victoria,
British Columbia, which is, of course, an insane
place to go looking for water. You find it very
locally. Yes, you can hardly avoid it. But even on a
clear night, it's not particularly dry. It's
about as wet a side as you can. And it's far north,
too. It's far north. The elevation is about 100
meters. It's a real wet place. On the other hand,
they've got a good telescope and a nice modern
spectrograph that had been built by Harvey
Richardson. So I got some time there with no more
difficulty than suggesting a collaboration with
Richardson, who had a mild interest in planetary
work. And I don't know why they gave me time, but
they did. I think it was, you know, something like a
couple weeks a year, which was a heck of a lot for
their second most powerful telescope and
certainly their modern telescope. So we got some
observations despite the usual difficulties
with weather up there. Not good enough to find
water on Mars or Venus, but we got some good enough
spectra to be interesting and to whet everybody's
appetite and to show that modern spectra, after we
learned how to, you know, walk and climb a bit
ourselves, we're clearly going to be superior to
the material from the 30s and 40s. No surprise.
Now, probably next comes the Kaplan, Munch, and
Spinrad work, or Kaplan's team, as it was called,
which was your idea, but will you explain how that
got going? Sure. Now we're going to
late, yeah, the observation was made on April 12,
1963. I remember it very distinctly, of course.
for a variety of egotistical reasons. In fact, I
told my current students in 1993 that there was an
anniversary that had something to do with Mars.
And I was waiting for them to guess it. No one did. It
was very humbling. So yesterday's prize is long
forgotten. What have you done for us lately? Yes.
Well, anyway, this got started by a continuation.
We realized that observing from Victoria wasn't
the smartest way to look for a minuscule amount of
water on Mars. We had no idea, of course, that we
could detect Martian CO2. Never entered a
conversation. It was all argon, then, in the
atmosphere of Mars. Nitrogen and argon. Or
nitrogen and argon, yeah. No, there was the CO2
detection, but it was so small, we thought, that
you'd never see it. There was no prayer, so it never
entered a conversation. So everything was
optimized for the H2O band at 8,200 angstroms,
which was stronger than the one we observed at
Victoria. We did the 7,200 angstrom region. I
don't remember why. I think the glaze of the
grating or something like that. And then Guido
insisted that we use forend plates, partly
because he wanted to find out how fast it could be
after you hyped them. Where did you stumble on this
hyperization with ammonia as opposed to cold
water that Mount Wilson used? It had been around
for a while. I don't know who invented it. It had
been in the folklore before Guido, but I had not
used it. I don't know who heard about it, but Munch
knew a bit more about it than I. Whose idea was it to
go after Mars, that particular maximum doppler
ship? No, that was mine. Okay. Just a natural
carryover from the Victorias. And then what, you
broached it to Guido and he used it? Yeah, and he had
time coming up, so it was all his time. We didn't get
any new time or special director's discretion for
it or not. On the other hand, Munch wasn't about to
have anybody push him off the telescope for any
reason. I mean, it was his time, man. He'd do what he
darn well pleased, senor. And how did Luke Kaplan
get involved in it? Kaplan was in the game. At that
time, he was then the section leader on the basis of
encouragement. I mean, he was an advocate of doing
these things, as well as preparing for space
experiments. And what happened, fortunately, is
that Munch and I went up to the mountain. Guido
showed me how to use the 100-inch Coudet, which
wasn't all that trivial. I felt slightly
overwhelmed, but we used it. And the first night,
we tried a one-end plate on Mars. It was a pretty
good night, and it came out all right, but it wasn't
anything outstanding. Then we tried a four-end
that we had hyped that afternoon, and it was
useless because we had overexposed it. It was too
sensitive. We figured it was going to be less
sensitive than the one-end, but it was actually
more sensitive. So that was useless. Which was not
the party line. It was not the conventional
wisdom. Well, if you don't hype them, it's down a
factor of 50, roughly. So the hypersensitization
was extraordinarily effective. I mean, it's an
art, like grinding up lizards and things,
witchcraft. Here are my scars from McDonald. Yes,
that's right. When you do this in the dark, besides
sniffing the ammonia, it's subject to occasional
failure of all sorts. I mean, the blood doesn't
really help much. Okay, so you're on your second
night now. Yeah, the second night, Guido had left.
Guido had other activities besides astronomy and
didn't want to stay up in the mountain for the whole
run, which I think was actually scheduled for four
nights. This is Now, April 12, 1963. So I exposed a
four-end plate to Mars for, I don't know, over the
order of three hours. I don't remember the exact
exposure time. And we got a spectrogram, and I was
going to start another one. Mars was at
quadrature, of course, to get the velocity, but I
guess it was far enough north that you could do more
than one. So I started the next one, and it clouded
up. So I had plenty of time to go in and develop the
plate. waiting for the clouds to go away, or Mars to
set, or whatever was going to happen. And I looked
at it, and I could tell it was a good plate. Even
then, slightly overexposed, but not much. Had
fairly good spatial resolution, good spectral
resolution, nice contrast on a forend, which is
one of the reasons you use it. And then basically, I
put it aside and said, hey, I'll get a few of these,
and we'll look at them, or we'll add them all up, or
do something terribly clever. No one had thought
of digital things then, of course, because it was
still analog type of analysis. And I put it away.
Well, unfortunately, it wasn't just clouds. The
next day, it got colder and colder. And finally, it
started snowing. So the rest of the run was wiped
out. I came home kind of disconsolate, having one
probably pretty good plate. But I don't know. I
didn't see anything in the hypo. So I didn't make a
big deal of it and sort of got on with my life for a
couple of days. After a few days, I said, oh, my.
Let's look at the thing and see if at least we can see
the water lines visually. And maybe they'll show
up. By golly, I think they did, especially over one
third of the exposure. I'm not sure I knew exactly
which way it was up at the time. I had to figure out
which polar cap it was. But they were there. But the
outstanding thing was not noticed until about a
week later. And for some reason, I decided to
compare the spectrum of Mars to a Venus spectrum
that I had from the same instrument taken by Dunham
a long time ago. And of course, the quality of the
new one, especially on a 4N, was far greater. But
the nice thing about the Venus old spectrum was
that it showed me where the 8689 carbon dioxide
band was located. And by golly, when I looked at the
Mars spectrum, there were the lines, much, much
weaker, but unmistakable. And you could match
them line for line. Yeah, it just blew me away. So I
went hooping and hollering around the trailers,
found Kaplan right away, had him look at it. He
wasn't much used to looking at spectra, but he
could see it too. And then called up Guido. He
refused to believe it for a few minutes. I don't
remember if he came up to look the same afternoon or
the next day, but we knew right away that that meant
that there was more carbon dioxide on Mars than
people had reckoned before by a lot. Because this
was intrinsically. It's a weak band. It doesn't
depend very much on the gas pressure. Total gas
pressure is mostly just dependent on the column of
carbon dioxide. So it's an unavoidable
conclusion that there had to be more CO2. So either
there had to be more atmosphere on Mars than anyone
thought, or the atmosphere, if thin, had to be
predominantly carbon dioxide. And those were
conclusions one could work out in your head
without even calculating a number. So that was
KMS-1, which got published on January 1, 1964. How
did the JPL publicity department handle this? I
can't remember. I think there was some interest in
it. As you recall, you got a pressure of, what was
it, finally? 25. 25 in that paper. 25 plus or minus
15. And the standard Girard de Bacallure is
80-ish? Yeah, 84 plus or minus 5 or 85 plus or minus
4. I could check that out. But they were already
designing entry capsules for the 85 millibar.
Yeah, right. That was just about happening that
way for, what was it, the first entry. Well,
Mariner 4, of course, was supposed to be a flyby. It
was a flyby. The first entry was a ways downstream,
but clearly they needed to know that. So what did
this do to planetary astronomy? Well, as soon as
anybody believed it, which happened actually
pretty quickly because Owen and Kuiper got
confirming observations relatively quickly. I
don't remember if it was exactly the same season.
How long between quadratures? Six, not that long.
Maybe they got it on the other side. I don't know. It
might not have been that season. Four months?
Yeah, or maybe six. But anyway, it wasn't a real
long time. So it got confirmed like in a year or
less. And then people definitely were taking it
seriously. reexamining old archives and mostly
reexamining the assumptions that went into the
surface pressure determinations, which then
looked, after a while, a lot weaker than they had in
1963. Now, you recall that I was at headquarters
during some of this time, from 63 in June to
September in 64. And during that time, John Strong
came in with a balloon flight that found an
enormous amount of, well, many times more water
vapor in the atmosphere of Mars than you did,
which caused great consternation at
headquarters. And at least in headquarters, the
people who weren't spectroscopists said, well,
we don't know who to believe. What did you think
about it? Well, you know, water can be temporal up
to a point, right? So you could imagine changes.
But, you know, I was a relatively brash young man. I
tend to believe what I do. Well, he had something
like 85,
what units did we used to use? Precipitable
microns, I think. Great units. Averaged over the
entire disk. Yeah, enormously higher. I would
have said 10 or 15 over the North Pole. I think
that's what we did say. Mm-hmm. Okay, now, when I
got back to headquarters there, that was that
Harlan Smith was now in high gear at the University
of Texas, and he and I had started the 107-inch, and
as I recall, you and I got a run at McDonald's.
82-inch. 82-inch, which lasted a month. Yeah, it
was incredible. And I guess I got there a week or so
earlier because the big photograph was in pieces.
Right. You put it together completely. I never got
in that stage. Okay. It was probably more than a
week. When this first... That was December of...
Of 64. 64, I think. Yeah, that's right. When you
first heard of this, how did... I forget now how
this went. I mean, who did Harlan call? You or me or
both of us? If I know, probably both of us. And then I
recall I was upstairs guiding or ammoniating or
developing or something, and I came down, and you
and Harlan were outside the library at the 82-inch
arranging the observing schedule for the next
year, which must have been a very unusual
situation for you. What about face? Famine to
feast? Completely unusual. It doesn't happen now
either, believe me. Would you say that for a long
time... McDonald was the only place where it was
not only safe, not only popular, but even safe to do
planetary astronomy. Well, it was all changing.
By 64 and 65, while it might not have been the focus
of everyone's pride and attention, it was no
longer in the closet, so to speak. And by the time I
got back to Berkeley as a faculty member... Which
was? Which was in February 64... and then I could
use Lick, automatic write, I could ask for coup de
time to do whatever darn well I pleased, and I did.
So I worked on Venus and Mars at Lick. In fact, some
of our joint paper on the Mars water and CO2 for that
opposition comes from Lick and a little bit more
from McDonald's. So it was okay. I mean, I don't
know if people cared one way or the other then. I
think it was clear then that exploring the planets
was going to be interesting both from the ground
and from spacecraft. So it just wasn't as... as
haute culture to look down your nose at planetary
astronomy. So that was beginning to change. On the
other hand, McDonald's was a place that one could
really do a lot. Herbig would get a few spectra
every year and then actually tire of it. I did it for
a few years, and Larry Giver as a student did a
little bit with Herbig. But other than that, there
wasn't a lot of planetary astronomy. Kit Peake
started coming in, so people like Toby Owen.
Exactly. Now, Kit Peake didn't have all the
prejudices of the past. They didn't have that
excess strange baggage. The only thing Kit Peake
might have had a little prejudice against, but I
don't think it really ever showed, was
Kuiper-type jealousy when Kuiper was across the
street at U of A. But I don't think that mattered.
And Kuiper had his slightly smaller telescopes on
northeast of Tucson. So by then, the
observational effect was getting pretty good.
Yeah, but McDonald was a unique thing at first. The
first years of the 82-inch Coudet, and then you
know more about the 107-inch, which actually I've
never used than I, but that was a wonderful
opportunity. So it went from famine to feast. Why
did you leave
JPL? Oh, partly because of the frustration of not
having a telescope that I could say I had a real bite
on, and partly for family reasons to get back in the
Bay Area, and partly because I was more interested
in having an academic-type career than one at a
place where things were a little bit more
regimented. Although JPL, I'd say in general,
treated me quite well. I was probably treated
better than the average scientist there that was
supposed to have a functional job to help
coordinate spacecraft things. between
engineers and scientists, for example, and they
ended up doing 10% functional work instead of 50%,
so I can't complain about that. But the
environment was not quite what I had wanted to do
for the rest of my career. So in 1964, I moved from
Pasadena. Why did you slowly drift out of
planetary work? Because there were
opportunities all over. I'm interested in the
whole universe, and... I still do commentary
work. One of my students is working on Io. So I did it
indirectly. I'm never completely out of it. I
certainly don't do it full time. And I'm not up with
the literature the way I might have been at one
time. But it's part of the universe that I enjoy.
And it's near enough that you can use different
techniques. If the techniques get too easy or the
spacecraft do it all, then clearly I would look for
something a little more challenging. Just as a
little personal aside, what was your first
meeting with Harlan Smith, and how did he impress
you?
I corresponded with Smitty about RLR stars a
little bit, because he did his thesis on light
curves of RLR stars, I believe, or something like
that at Yale. And I was interested in doing that as a
student project under the direction to some
extent of George Preston when I was a second-year
graduate student before I knew the names of the
satellites of Saturn or what Gibbous meant.
I don't know when I met him first physically. Well,
he certainly wasn't like your typical Mont Wilson
Palomar director, was he? No, no. Smitty was a very
open uh not necessarily wearing a tie and stiff
shirt type person would never known he was an
observatory director while the prototype the
prototypical director of the early 60s was
someone that you know had grown up in an earlier
time and was much more formal than that uh what was
planetary astronomy like when you started in 61
and 62
small, in some disrepute, but with enough
promise, just because it hadn't been attacked
very much, that it looked interesting, and also,
of course, the prospect of getting direct
information from the space probes, if they had
ever worked at the time. When I started in 61,
nothing was working, and Rangers were crashing
into the Moon, and we couldn't get to the Moon
successfully, let alone Mars or Venus. So it
looked like it might be a bit of a long haul, but
clearly the impetus was there. It was a national
goal to do the moon and beyond. So I figured that
there would be lots of opportunities in
non-traditional astronomy, if not the
traditional. But of course, it turned out the
traditional was still wide open also. What do you
think is the best piece of work in planetary
astronomy you've done? We're going to chisel on a
tombstone. Oh, my.
Certainly the most dramatic and the part I can
relive if I feel self-depressed is that detection
of CO2 on the Mars spectrogram. That was the one
moment where it all flashed in front of you. As soon
as I saw the lines, believed they were real, I knew
in less time than it takes the neurons to move
around, I guess, that this was important because
there was a lot more CO2 than people had thought.
Actually, working out the detailed surface
pressure took a little while. That, I think, is the
flashiest thing. It turned out to be more or less
right. What was the most fun? that or something
else well that was fun instantaneously i don't
know all of it's fun all of it's fine uh we already
talked about dead ends or misfires so we'll skip
lots of those i mean working on comets now is a lot of
fun they're pretty pretty fascinating get
surprises comets never comets were always
acceptable uh isn't that even in the 20s and 30s I
wonder why. I mean, the physics was a little bit
more like stellar or gaseous nebulae
astrophysics, a little bit. The people that did
the laboratory stuff and identifications for
comets were well-regarded folks. Phillips did C2
and Cn. Identifications of other things were by
Swings, who certainly was a famous and extremely
well-regarded astronomer, no matter what he did.
I don't know if that's the reason or not. No, you
weren't a pariah if you worked on comets. I mean,
Greenstein did it in 1956. Nobody seemed to mind.
Have
you had any direct NSA funding since you left JPL?
Yeah, yeah. How have they treated you? I mean,
normally. Do you think the folks at headquarters
or whoever's handling your stuff understand what
you're doing? Do they keep up with this? Yeah,
because Rahe is the program director. And when I'm
working on comments, he probably knows almost as
much about the specific subject as I. I've been
treated well by them in recent years. So no gripes
about mismanagement, micromanagement, or
anything like that? Not at all, no. Do they try and
tell you what to do? Nope. Not now.
I mean, I get review remarks from the committees.
The scientific review committees aren't always
flattering. But that's normal, isn't it? Where do
you think planetary astronomy would be today
without NASA?
It's very hard to tell whether it would have ever
caught on again. It would have. Somebody would
have blundered across something by accident that
would have turned it around. But it might have
taken a long, long time. I mean, it was in a deep well
for not its own fault for some years. And it's very
hard to say. But for NASA, in its own
blunderbuss-type approach, I think it helped.
Which brings me to the point, all the participants
are dead, so all we've got is the opinions of live
people. What do you think killed astronomy,
basically killed as an active field? I know there
was a little bit done in the 20s and 30s and 40s in
planetary astronomy. But it was a moribund field.
And at the turn of the century, it was not. Was it
that other fields opened up, or that they ran into
instrumental barriers, like no good infrared
detectors, or just what? It's hard to say.
Percival Lowell? Lowell did something, but that
was earlier. I don't think that should have had an
effect from, say, the 40s through 1960. But there
were so few people of competence in the field in the
late 50s. I mean, Kuiper and who else was there?
Chamberlain was just getting started. I don't
know if he was a full-fledged planetary
astronomer or would have called himself that or
something else. Who else was outstanding in
planetary astronomy. Erpik did a lot of other
things. He did some planetary astronomy that was
good, but of course in the States that didn't get
recognition at the time. And swings, of course, in
Europe, but that was a part-time affair for him. I
don't know. I mean, Kuiper, of course, had a
reputation that was antagonistic, so people
didn't like him personally in some cases. That may
have played some role, but basically I'm not quite
sure I can put my finger on it, but Certainly other
fields of astronomy and astrophysics seem to have
more simplistic and direct physical answers. The
problems are tough on planets. I mean, in the case
of the rocky planets, I'll include Mars mostly in
that, Moon, Mars, Jupiter, and then the small
things. Basically, it was thought that only
geologists could have an impact there. And then
the atmosphere of Venus was, well, studied by
Dunham and Adams. And they found CO2. And what can
you do after that? So the field was thought to be
sterile. New techniques hadn't advanced to the
point where they could make a big contribution.
For example, if we had infrared detectors of high
quality and infrared spectrometers in 1960, the
way we do in 1990-something, clearly that would
have opened up a lot of doors. But it seemed to be a
combination. I'm not sure there's a terribly easy
explanation for it. I've been asking certain
people particularly about the formation of the
DPS and Icarus, but this holds for all fields of
astronomy in this country, where 30 years ago all
we had was an American Astronomical Society,
basically, and then we had the APJ and the AJ, and
that was kind of it. ASP. ASP, right. That was very
local, though. But that was about it. Now we have
these separate divisions of the American
Astronomical Society, and most of them, or a lot of
them, with their own journals. Is this good or bad?
I still cling to the outmoded thought that it would
be nice to be such a sufficiently good generalist
that you could know a fair amount about
everything. For example, in today's AAS meeting
program, Schneider gave a talk on the Io Taurus and
Io volcanoes, and there was a very, very good
audience of mostly non-planetary people. So
there's still some semblance of people wanting at
least no highlights about everything. So in a way,
it would be nice to have everything in a couple of
journals because one's office isn't big enough to
take them all now. But the journals would be
thicker then. But the journals would be thicker
and unmanageable. So I don't know. I still think
it's kind of unfortunate that we have to
specialize, but there's no choice. We can survive
this way too. In the so-called good old days, did
stellar and planetary astronomers ever talk to
each other anyway? I think some of them did.
Well, here's a good question, which your point
about the talk about the EOTOR has brought up, and
this has to do with AAS having invited review
papers. Do you think that, because of things like
that and a perhaps more open attitude on both sides
than we had thirty years ago, that, for example,
planetary and real astronomers talk more than
they used to thirty years ago, or less, or about the
same?
For example, there's a large interest in the folks
that do star formation in the early solar system
now, because they're trying to find analogs of the
early solar system in the Taurus cloud and other
obscured places, molecular clouds where young
stars form. So they're quite interested in
planetary astronomy at some level, maybe not in
the geology of every rock on Mars or the moon. But at
some level, they're definitely interested. So I
think, in fact, things are a little bit better And
there's moderately good communication. So I
think having invited talks on subjects where
there's overlap is very healthy and probably
successful. So AAS in its biannual meeting is, to
some extent, doing that. I don't know if the
planetary division ever has a talk. I think they
do, by people interested, for example, in star
formation, which is at least indirectly related
to planetary formation. That happens sometimes.
You think a planetary astronomy is a part of
astronomy? Sure. I might have a minority view on
that. Yeah, it is. It is. A lot of the techniques are
the same. A lot of them are different. If you go to
the DPS, you don't hear a tremendous amount about
other fields of astronomy, but you do hear
something. Yeah, I think scientists now are
multidisciplined enough in their brains to
realize that a sharp division is artificial.
Well, I know the DPS, I've seen coronagraph
pictures of some nearby stars. Yeah, sure.
Absolutely. This, again, is a personal thing, but
I'm going to try and build up a consensus.